{:: encoding="UTF-8" /}

# Programming tools

_Gianluca Fiore_

In your climb to the highest peaks of the programming world, hopefully you will encounter a plethora of languages, resources, conversations, and people. All of them will be accessible to you through _tools_, whether they be a web browser, an editor, a compiler or something else, depending on the task at hand. The choice of what tool to use for a given job may be daunting at the beginning and is one you shouldn't waste too much precious time on---that time is best spent actually learning and coding. This chapter will help you to understand how important your choice of tools for coding is, or is not, and why so many programmers care a great deal about theirs.

Programming is luckily extremely forgiving of not choosing the best tool for a specific task, especially for advanced programmers who have learned how to "bend" tools and languages to their will. Yet at the beginning a poor tool for what you're trying to achieve could make you waste a lot of time and possibly give up altogether. Please don't. 

The tool of choice will depend on your area of expertise. If you are doing front end web programming, the choice of browser you're developing on first is vital, since they differ in the features and development tools they support; a back end programmer may care more about a good debugger and compiler, if any, and so on.

Every programming language has its strengths and weaknesses. Some are truly fast, like C, but ask you to do more math and be more careful with possible bugs in your code. Others are much easier, like Python and Ruby, but will usually be slower unless heavily optimized---something that, at the beginning, may be hard to master. If you need to write a website nowadays JavaScript is king so trying to do it with a language not specifically designed for the web, like Go or Java, might increase the difficulty for you. You could still do it, sure, but very few beginning programmers have the knowledge to depart from the specific goal that a programming language was designed for.

Thus, it's best to focus on what your project needs to achieve and what you would like your path in the programming world to be and choose the right language for them. You will learn faster and will meet less difficulties with your projects. There is always time to learn other languages later and to expose yourself to their new concepts. No language is useless to learn. But don't try to learn language X because Y is using it and it sounds cool. Learn what is useful for you.

The same is valid for operating systems and editors. Pick the tool you feel most productive and comfortable in. It may not be the best operating system ever nor the one with the best tools or the editor that will make you type fastest, but it's more important to get started and not waste time fighting against the tool to make it behave like you want. There's no need to make it more complicated than it should be.

### Wars? What wars?

Related to this, if you follow news or discussions about programming on social media or online groups you may be surprised to find that the word "war" is used when discussing various tools.

It may be an "editor war" or "browser war" or the "tabs vs spaces" war. Or the "OSes war", which stands for "Operating Systems war". They are not actual wars fought with weapons and soldiers, luckily, but with words and interminable discussions on which tool is the best for a specific job or task, or about which one is simply better or whether you should code in a specific way or not. These "wars" date back decades, a few even before some of us were born, and show no signs of ever ending in a truce.

So what are those wars then? And why should you care (or not)?

The origin of it all lays in the tendency of many programmers of average or high experience to stick with a system, be it a language, a framework, or a tool, throughout their career---either because it is the one they like the best, they find themselves the most comfortable coding with or in it, or simply because it was the first one they truly mastered and don't feel like learning a new one. There's absolutely nothing wrong with that and it's part of the reason some languages have had such a long life despite tens of newer languages having been developed after them.

In any case, some programmers may seem outraged that you use, let's say, Windows instead of MacOS. Or that you chose to start coding with a visual code editor like Atom or Visual Studio instead of a text-based editor like Emacs or Vim. Or that your personal browser of choice doesn't appeal to them because it's not up to date with modern web standards or is developed by EvilCompany™ and by using it you are contributing to their world dominance plans or something.

These are the "wars" you will definitely hear about. Some people will try to convince you to use a different tool for your job, for practical or ideological reasons. Even ethical ones, sometimes. Whatever you may think about them, they're part of the history of computing and are part of the folklore, along with countless jokes and memes, of the programming community as a whole. Knowing a bit about them will help you navigate the references that may occasionally pop up in threads on social media and forums and help you choose the right tools at the beginning of your programming journey.

### The ancient editor war

One of the most famous, and still going strong, is the religious war between Emacs and Vim ("religious" as there actually is a Church Of Emacs, no joke). For those who don't know them well, Emacs and Vim are two ancient text editors that over the years have developed a vast community around them, with thousands of plugins to increase their functionality and an array of different themes to change their appearance. If you haven't had the chance to read their history yet, Vim stands for "Vi Improved" as it is the direct successor of a previous editor, Vi, which in turn was inspired by an even older one, Ed. We're talking early 70s here. Bram Moolenaar, the author of Vim, ported it to various platforms and made it "modern" in its functionality for that time. Curiously, Emacs was also indirectly inspired by Ed as its ancestor was TECO, which was similar to the Ed editor. Later Richard Stallman improved it (see the pattern?) and renamed it Editor Macros, Emacs for short. End of history lesson.

On the deepest level, the rivalry between the 2 editors is not a practical one: they both do their job very well, in our case allowing us to code in an efficient way, and are great at not overwhelming a new programmer with too many features---you won't feel too lost at first as you can just learn what you need to start coding without getting lost in a ton of menus and options. Actually, in their text versions, neither has any menus at all.

Where they do differ is in the philosophy: Vim espouses the *small is beautiful* and *do one thing well* tenets of the system it was originally developed for, Unix, while Emacs centers on supporting development as an entire operational hub. Emacs tries to be the center of your coding experience, providing you with all the features you need to develop with ease, whereas Vim tries to just edit text very well and lets you add other features with plugins. Emacs is all-encompassing, Vim is more focused. Both are very quirky by today's standards and may seem extremely counterintuitive at first. That in turn gives rise to a smaller "war" between those preferring more modern coding environments, graphical ones usually, and those that stuck with Emacs or Vim.

The point of this particular war is how one prefers to code: with a single program, which you probably never leave and contains all your code, debugger and text editing capabilities, or with multiple programs that you open from time to time, when you need, and can keep in the background of your work, occupying less hardware resources at the cost of being more minimal. Whether you prefer one philosophy or another, or want to totally avoid both Emacs and Vim, it's not important when you are starting out as a coder. Your focus should be on learning to code. You will develop preferences for one mainstream philosophy or another, or perhaps even develop your own alternative, in the future. Right now these editors are just tools that can help you code better, not necessarily faster. If you don't feel at ease with them, postpone learning them until later. Stick to solving problems and completing code projects, not getting to know all the idiosyncrasies of various editors. If you prefer a beginner-friendly interface, editors like Atom or Visual Studio Code will make you feel at home.

### The Windows/Linux war

The same attitude can be held regarding the OS wars too. There are plenty of opinionated programmers that will swear by using Windows or MacOS, and others that will laugh at them as the "real" coding experience can be had only with more minimal, "barebone" operating systems like [Linux](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux) and [BSD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berkeley_Software_Distribution). Either can be right of course, this isn't the book to discuss which operating system is the best for programming. The best one for you is the one that allows you to be the most productive, that gets least in the way of your learning and improving as a programmer. If you are already using one that you feel perfectly comfortable with, have no grudge against and have perhaps explored a few alternatives but none have sparked any interest, keep using your current operating system. Don't get bogged down in perfecting what already works. The tools are for you to use and if you aren't more productive with a commonly reputed "better" one, stick with the one you have.

### Browser and style wars

Of a slightly different nature, and here is where you should start to care more, are the "tabs vs spaces" war and the browser war. The latter is easier to understand so let's start there. If you are heading towards being a front end web developer, you may already know that different browsers have different rendering engines---how they create the actual pieces that a webpage is composed of, and render or "show" them on the screen. That (as a really simplified explanation) is what browsers do, they take instructions in the form of HTML, CSS or JavaScript code and process them through their internal engine to produce a visual result, a webpage that can be read and interacted with by users. Having different engines, the process by which they render the webpage is different and thus the results can be different too. That means a webpage can look different depending on what browser you use to access it. The same is true for mobile devices: a webpage is shown in a different way depending on the size of the device the browser is installed on. That's a well-known fact and an intentional feature meant to adapt any webpage to any device, from the tiniest cell phones to the largest quad-monitor setups.

The browser wars were born out of different browsers competing to capture the widest audience; in ancient times they were sold on CDs and thus they had to be commercially successful. Nowadays all browsers are free to download (except for Safari that is only available for Apple machines) and the commercial incentive is not directly money but instead related to the rendering engines: if a browser becomes so widespread that it has an absolute majority of the internet users, then it is easier for developers to write their webpages targeting only its rendering engine, making sure it looks the best on it and not considering minimal differences in appearance with other browsers. Thus, indirectly, a browser that has a dominant share of the market can influence the development of the technologies that compose the Web by implementing some of them earlier, or not implementing others at all, knowing that many developers will follow their lead.

Over the course of the last 30 years since the Web was born, various browsers have reached a dominant status over the others. Netscape, Internet Explorer, Firefox, and Chrome have all had their share of the spotlight in these browser wars. Regardless of the reasons why each browser rose and fell, what's important to us as developers is that using one browser over the others will mean not only having different tools for development (usually called "Dev Tools" or "Developer Tools"), but running the risk of optimizing the websites we write for that browser and that browser only. It's way too common to be lazy and content with your website looking good on your browser of choice, assuming that it's okay for others too. Or, worse, noticing some small issue with the layout or an oversized font or a slightly misplaced menu in another browser and ignoring it because "only a few people use it". That may be true, but if not, its users won't have a good experience using the site and this will increase the feeling that the most widespread browser is the "best" one. You are indirectly and involuntarily creating a monopoly in the browser market. This is why I try to make sure I test my webpages with all major browsers at the very least. If we keep the competition open and fair, developers and users alike will benefit from it.

"Tabs vs spaces" is a more technical war. In the beginning, talking again of the early 70s, editors would use a tab character to indent code. One tab character was the equivalent of eight space characters and in the old days disk space was scarce, so one character was better than eight. Nowadays we have disks in the order of terabytes so the difference is negligible. Yet the issue here is of interoperability: Mac and Windows editors tend to make a tab character the equivalent of four spaces while on Linux and BSD, it is still eight. Unless you change the preference in your editor of choice, of course. Because of this, most fans of spaces instead of tabs will consider you wrong for using tabs because a space character is always a space character, no matter the editor and system you are using. On the other hand, tab fans claim that one tab is much less typing than four to eight spaces.

The issue is, if you are using four spaces, for instance, and your programming buddy uses eight, then the code will be indented differently and some languages, like Python, will even bail out with errors as the syntax of the language depends on the correct indentation of the code. And besides, the resulting code will look messy and hard to read. Moreover, copying and pasting from a web browser in a local editor will most definitely screw up the indentation as it will depend on which browser, which website, which editor and which operating system you are copying and pasting from/to. There's far from a standard here.

So for portability, do consider what you prefer and stick to it, but not before having spent a little bit of time to check what is the recommended way to indent in your programming language and in the project you are coding on. There are guidelines about tabs vs spaces in all the most popular languages. It will make everybody's life easier and save you from arguing with older programmers that will most surely believe their stance in this war is the "right" one.

### Use what you like, focus on learning

In an ideal world, nobody would judge you because you have taken a specific stance in one of these wars (or not) or because of your choice of tools. Some will joke about it and some will fake being offended that you have a different opinion, but nobody should discriminate against you in your path to becoming a good programmer, just because you use a specific editor or prefer a Mac to a PC. Yet it will happen, so it's important to be at least aware of each of these wars. They may influence your choice of coding tools. And hopefully this bit of history will save you from endless discussions about which side is right, if any. As Bertrand Russell famously said, "War does not determine who is right---only who is left."
