# Burnout, part 2

_John Woodruff_

Burnout: a hazard that the software industry is particularly prone to, and one that occurs far more often than it should. Over the course of your career you'll hear the stories of your co-worker's friend who burned out so badly they ended up changing careers. Perhaps it is closer to home and happens to someone you personally know. We all tell ourselves that it won't happen to us, that we love programming far too much to burn out, so we don't take the necessary steps to avoid it. But burnout is a very real threat, and it will happen to some extent to many of us. I didn't believe it could affect me, yet I have dealt with episodes of burnout throughout my career. By understanding burnout, its symptoms and causes, we can take concrete steps to avoid it altogether and to come back from being burned out.

Burnout is a slow process. You don't just wake up one day and suddenly you're burned out. For me it was a state that set in gradually, with the symptoms becoming worse over time. At the beginning, they may be insignificant enough that you barely notice anything is amiss, which makes it difficult to determine that you're on the path to burning out. There are a variety of symptoms that may manifest themselves. Please note that this is by no means an exhaustive list, these are simply some of the most common issues related to burnout.

You may feel _anxiety_, often about your job, usually carrying over into your personal life. It's also common to experience _depression_, especially if you are already prone to it, but someone who has never felt depressed before can experience it as a symptom of burnout. One of the most common symptoms is a _lack of attention span and motivation_ at your place of work. It becomes very _difficult to focus_ on tasks, in meetings, and during general workplace activities. You may feel constantly exhausted, both at work and at home, whether or not you've gotten enough sleep. It can affect your sleep too, possibly manifesting itself in new or worsening _insomnia_. You may find yourself becoming more _irritable_ or _pessimistic_ in your interactions with friends and co-workers. You could experience _guilt_ for not feeling like you used to in your job, or like you perceive your co-workers feel.

All of this and more leads to the most common symptom: _poor job performance_. You are no longer motivated to do your work. Tasks that once would have seemed small to you suddenly appear enormous or insurmountable. You may find yourself coming in late, taking extra long breaks, or leaving early because you feel like you can't handle it. You aren't paying attention or participating in meetings where your input is wanted or required, which affects everyone involved. Unchecked burnout can even lead to the need to stop programming altogether and change careers. Sadly, it's happened to many people before and it will continue to happen unless we as developers take the proper steps to recover from and avoid burnout.

To understand how to avoid burnout, we need to first understand the common causes. There are many reasons and ways one might get burned out. The most common ways are usually directly related to long term stress without relief. This could include any number of scenarios, including working long hours for too long without a vacation; constantly working on projects that have unrealistic deadlines set by others without your input; being stuck on project maintenance while you watch other developers working with cool new tools and technologies; having an unhealthy work-life balance that is skewed too far towards work; or working in a dysfunctional environment that makes you feel unsafe. All of these contribute directly to your level of burnout.

I've experienced many of those scenarios, and unless you're exceptionally lucky, you will too throughout your career. My most recent episode of burnout was due to being on a project for two years with no end in sight---a project I desperately wanted to succeed, but which seemingly had everything thrown in its way to stop it from doing so. The stresses of that environment grew and grew until I found myself dreading going to work. I couldn't fall asleep at night for hours thinking about this project. I no longer wanted to work on the previously enjoyable side projects I'd had going on. In addition to that, the project was frequently put on hold for another project that had an extremely short deadline imposed by others that I had no control over. So instead of finishing the new project and being relieved to go back to my old project, it was simply more stress. It was a very difficult time in my career.

The above situation boils down to several basic feelings you might relate to. You feel _stuck_ or _trapped_ with no end in sight. You are dealing with _impossible goals_ which makes you more depressed each time you miss them. You've _overworked_ yourself. When the mind has endured high levels of stress for too long, it becomes exhausted and craves relief. This _exhaustion_ is central to many of the symptoms I listed previously, such as anxiety, depression, and lack of focus. If you let any of this get too far without intervention, you risk burning yourself completely out of your career.

With all that in mind, let's talk about avoiding burnout. If you're currently suffering from burnout, these principles apply to recovering from burnout as much as to avoiding it. In short, it's about taking control of your professional (and personal) life, which will help you to be a well-balanced individual. Having proper balance in our lives leads to better mental and physical health, improved mood and happiness, and increased productivity, whether that be at work or in other pursuits.

The first thing you need to do is make sure you _set proper boundaries_. You're in a form of a relationship with your work and employer, and as with any other type of relationship, good boundaries exist to keep the relationship healthy and happy. While looking for a job, you should know the limits of what you're able and willing to do for the company. An employer may have the expectation that you work 12 hour days, 6 days a week (rather than a standard 40 hour week) to further the goals of the company. They may think you should forego using your vacation time to put in more hours at work. While there may be people who are okay with that kind of an environment, I see it as a form of abusive relationship between employer and employee. With the companies I've worked for thus far, I've been very careful to research their culture and determine whether I would be required to do things that are unreasonable and go past my established boundaries. This is not to say, of course, that I refuse to work a minute past 40 hours. There have been many occasions where I've worked long hours to meet a deadline, fix an issue, or help mentor someone else. In these situations, however, I was usually able to recover adequately by (for example) taking a day off the next week.

The ability to _take time off_ is key to avoiding burnout. Time off, even if that's simply making sure you don't work on the weekend, is time our mind needs to be able to recover from the stresses of the workplace. By working constantly with little to no breaks, that mental stress continues to build without relief, slowly burning you out. It's a common false belief that by working that much, you'll become a better programmer. I held that belief at the beginning of my career and have since changed my attitude. In the long run, becoming burned out will severely harm, if not destroy, your ability to work effectively. Taking a vacation where you completely disconnect from work (and coding in particular) can be incredibly therapeutic for programmers who may be slowly burning out. Even doing this during the weekends can help stave off the struggles that are associated with burnout, so make sure to take the time for yourself to unplug and rejuvenate. Also take advantage of your employer-provided vacation days; they're given specifically as a benefit for you to use to recharge.

There are many other small things I recommend for helping to keep your work-life balance in check. Engaging in non-work related hobbies and activities, for example, is a great way to keep your personal life separate from your work life. Keeping your body healthy through regular exercise is also important and helps keep your mind stimulated. Perhaps the most helpful thing to do is to be consistent. Inconsistency causes stress, and if there's anything we've learned thus far, it's to reduce the amount of stress we feel on a regular basis.

Occasionally more drastic measures are necessary. While most of my small burnout episodes were solved by taking a couple days or a week off from work and totally disconnecting to rejuvenate, the most recent episode I talked about required a different approach when my standard methods had failed. It wasn't so bad that I quit coding, but it was bad enough that I was no longer in an environment conducive to a good career. I needed to find a new job and get out of that situation so I could bring myself back. I'm very happy to report that at the time of writing I'm happily employed at a new company working on a product that is much more stable and healthy than what I was on previously. I also am part of an excellent team that highly values work-life balance and shows it by example. I've never been happier in my career than I am right now, mere months after dreading going in to work.

Burnout is a difficult trial to overcome, but if I can tell you anything, it's that it can be recovered from successfully. I can say that from experience, having felt varying levels of burnout at various times throughout my career. Even better than recovering from burnout is avoiding it entirely, something I've re-committed myself to more fully in recent months. By putting into practice the recommendations mentioned above and taking control of our professional lives, we can make real strides towards keeping our personal and work life in balance, and keeping burnout at bay.
